This thesis reports (i) the development of a new auxiliary model method for studying translation-invariant models of strongly-interacting electrons, and (ii) an explicit demonstration of the holographic principle in the form of a simple and tractable exact holographic mapping for a free fermion system with emphasis on the signatures at a critical Fermi surface.
Together, these results shed light on how a system of electrons behaves as it undergoes a correlation-driven metal-insulator transition on a lattice.
The auxiliary model method allows us to create a mapping between a lattice model and an impurity model in terms of the Hamiltonian, eigenstates, Greens functions and entanglement measures.
This mapping ensures that such lattice model quantities can be computed indirectly from similar computations within the auxiliary impurity model.
The mapping makes use of translation operators and a many-body Bloch's theorem to recreate the lattice model via repeated ``tiling operations" on the impurity model.
In contrast to other auxiliary model methods such as dynamical mean-field theory and its cluster variants, this approach does not involve a self-consistency loop, making it more transparent.
It also provides significantly more k-space resolution, which is necessary for studying phenomena such as the pseudogap observed in the copper-oxide high-Tc superconductors.
Within our work on the holographic principle, we demonstrate the emergence of a holographic dimension in a system of 2D non-interacting Dirac fermions placed on a torus, by studying the scaling of multipartite entanglement measures under a sequence of renormalisation group (RG) transformations applied in momentum space.
Geometric measures defined in this emergent space can be related to the RG beta function of the spectral gap, hence establishing a holographic connection between the spatial geometry of the emergent dimension and the entanglement properties of the boundary quantum theory.
We prove analytically that changing the boundedness of the holographic space involves a topological transition accompanied by a critical Fermi surface in the boundary theory.
We go on to show that this results in the formation of a quantum wormhole geometry that connects the UV and the IR of the emergent dimension.

This thesis reports (i) the development of a new auxiliary model method for studying translation-invariant models of strongly-interacting electrons, and (ii) an explicit demonstration of the holographic principle in the form of a simple and tractable exact holographic mapping (EHM) for a free fermion system with emphasis on the signatures at a critical Fermi surface.
Together, these results shed light on how a system of electrons behaves as it undergoes a correlation-driven metal-insulator transition on a lattice.
The auxiliary model method allows us to create a mapping between a lattice model and an auxiliary impurity model in terms of the Hamiltonian, eigenstates, Greens functions and entanglement measures, among other things.
This mapping ensures that such lattice model quantities can be computed indirectly from similar computations within the auxiliary impurity model.
The mapping makes use of translation operators and a many-body version of Bloch’s theorem to recreate the lattice model via repeated “tiling” operations on the impurity model.
In contrast to other auxiliary model methods such as dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) and its cluster variants (C-DMFT), this approach does not involve a self-consistency loop, making it more transparent.
It also provides significantly more 𝑘−space resolution which is necessary for studying phenomena such as the pseudogap observed in the copper-oxide high-𝑇𝑐 superconductors.
Within our work on the holographic principle, we demonstrate the emergence of a holographic dimension in a system of 2D non-interacting Dirac fermions placed on a torus, by studying the scaling of multipartite entanglement measures under a sequence of renormalisation group (RG) transformations applied in momentum space.
Geometric measures defined in this emergent space can be related to the RG beta function of the spectral gap, hence establishing a holographic connection between the spatial geometry of the emergent spatial dimension and the entanglement properties of the boundary quantum theory.
We prove, analytically, that changing the boundedness of the holographic space involves a topological transition accompanied by a critical Fermi surface in the boundary theory.
We go on to show that this results in the formation of a quantum wormhole geometry that connects the UV and the IR of the emergent dimension.
